#LyX 2.2 created this file. For more info see http://www.lyx.org/
\lyxformat 508
\begin_document
\begin_header
\save_transient_properties true
\origin unavailable
\textclass article
\use_default_options true
\maintain_unincluded_children false
\language english
\language_package default
\inputencoding auto
\fontencoding global
\font_roman "default" "default"
\font_sans "default" "default"
\font_typewriter "default" "default"
\font_math "auto" "auto"
\font_default_family default
\use_non_tex_fonts false
\font_sc false
\font_osf false
\font_sf_scale 100 100
\font_tt_scale 100 100
\graphics default
\default_output_format default
\output_sync 0
\bibtex_command default
\index_command default
\paperfontsize default
\use_hyperref false
\papersize default
\use_geometry false
\use_package amsmath 1
\use_package amssymb 1
\use_package cancel 1
\use_package esint 1
\use_package mathdots 1
\use_package mathtools 1
\use_package mhchem 1
\use_package stackrel 1
\use_package stmaryrd 1
\use_package undertilde 1
\cite_engine basic
\cite_engine_type default
\biblio_style plain
\use_bibtopic false
\use_indices false
\paperorientation portrait
\suppress_date false
\justification true
\use_refstyle 1
\index Index
\shortcut idx
\color #008000
\end_index
\secnumdepth 3
\tocdepth 3
\paragraph_separation indent
\paragraph_indentation default
\quotes_language english
\papercolumns 1
\papersides 1
\paperpagestyle default
\tracking_changes false
\output_changes false
\html_math_output 0
\html_css_as_file 0
\html_be_strict false
\end_header

\begin_body

\begin_layout Standard
The development of high-throughput technologies over the last two decades
 has brought significant promise towards understanding biology and has shed
 light on the genomic involvement in the progression of human disease.
 Microarray and sequencing technologies has allowed us to interrogate many
 different types of biological problems at the molecular level, including
 the study of the genome, the transcriptome, the epigenome and much more
 and dramatically reduced cost.
 For example, RNA-Seq is commonly used to measure the abundance of RNA (often
 selected for mRNA) in a biological sample with the hope that relative the
 quantities of RNA mapping to particular genes will help explain the phenotypic
 differences we observe at a higher level.
 But, as this ability to collect data has increased, so too have the statistical
, biological and computational challenges that accompany related questions.
 It is clear that most phenotypic differentiation is not attributable to
 single units (genes or variants, for example) responsible for high level
 function.
 Instead, we observe that cell states are more adequately described with
 models that include numerous interacting features.
 We are interested in hidden structures within the data that can tell us
 more about these systems than the sum of individual components of the data.
 However, this underlying framework may represent many types of hidden systems,
 depending on the particular data.
 In some cases, this structure is important to understanding the mechanisms
 which drive disease, but other times that structure arises from other variables
, such as batch effect and population stratification, that may confound
 analyses.
 It is critical to find and address these artifacts where possible, as failing
 to do so leads to inflated rates of false positives.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
In the case of gene expression studies, significant work has been undertaken
 describing states with gene networks.
 Specifically, if these models describe direct regulatory function we refer
 to them as Gene Regulatory Networks (GRN) and if they more generally imply
 ``guilt-by-association'' coexpression in an undirected graph, we call them
 Gene Coexpression Networks (GCN).
 This has lead to a growth in our understanding of biological function along
 with an appreciation for the complexity of molecular pathways and the biologica
l processes that accompany them.
 
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
It is due to this intricacy that determining the targets of transcription
 factors in a gene regulatory network is challenging.
 It is often not the raw abundance of a gene that we are concerned with
 - it is the manner in which that gene's expression pattern matches others
 that provide clues to its biological function.
 With this in mind there is much focus on genes that have expression patterns
 associated with one another.
 This dependency, often measured with a simple statistic such as Pearson
 correlation, may imply a direct or indirect interaction between genes,
 such as a regulatory mechanism or a membership in a common cellular pathway.
 In constructing networks, typically nodes are defined as genes or transcription
 factors while edges may be interpreted as describing a wide range of possible
 biological and/or statistical interactions.
 In a case-control context, our goals can be divided into two distinct parts,
 (1) the construction of gene regulatory networks and (2) the analysis of
 the structural changes between those networks.
 Due to the complexity of the underlying networks and the high dimensionality
 of typical datasets, these challenges remain open problems.
 In this dissertation we the explore novel methods developed for gaining
 insight into network transformations between cases and controls in a complex
 disease.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The use of the use of high-throughput assays, such as gene expression microarray
s, for the inference of biological networks is an active field of study.
 Of common interest is the estimation of the set of interactions between
 the set nodes of a graph, referred to as edges and vertices, respectively.
 Typically, these vertices represent the measured genes or a subset thereof
 in an organism.
 The interpretation of the edges covers a wide range of possible biological
 and statistical interactions.
 A widely used model is the Gaussian Graphical Model, which seeks to fit
 the gene expression data as independent samples from a multivariate normal
 distribution with the standardized variance-covariance matrix derived from
 the network adjacency matrix, which defines the edges between each pairwise
 combination of p genes.
 We can then interpret the presence or absence of an edge as the dependence
 or independence of the two genes conditional on all others.
 This adjacency matrix may be estimated in many ways, such as with a direct
 maximum likelihood estimation or fitting a regression model.
 However, a significant impediment to inferring network structure is the
 high-dimensionality of the data such that the number of edges for each
 vertex is larger (much larger!) than the number of samples.
 Many methods have been developed to address this issue, often by introducing
 a prior belief that the overwhelming majority of possible edges do not
 exist.
 This sparsity constraint has been exploited by employing a number of statistica
l tools such as feature selection methods and penalized regression.
 Often for interpretive and visual purposes, these results are dichotomized
 to yield a present/absent indication of interaction between nodes potentially
 losing valuable information for the strength in information and degree
 of uncertainty for inferred edges.
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
The growth of complementary data sources has allowed for the bolstering
 of numerous published network inference methods.
 A semi-supervised learning method, SEREND, was developed to incorporate
 Transcription factor-DNA information, including sequence binding motifs
 in network reconstruction[ernst2008semi].
 This method dramatically improved prediction of TF regulatory targets as
 measured by ChIP-chip data in E.
 coli.
 Another approach to inferring networks was presented by Glass et al, PANDA,
 by modeling the regulatory network as a bipartite graph with pairwise connectio
ns existing in three distinct sets, (1) within the set of known TFs, (2)
 within the set of genes, and (3) between TFs and genes[glass2013passing].
 The algorithm finds convergence in the flow of information from the TF
 layer of the network through the gene layer via concepts of responsibility
 and availability.
 This method was a demonstrated to be an additional improvement over SEREND
 in predicting gene regulatory networks in Yeast and has been used to infer
 networks in ovarian cancer [glass2015network] and COPD[glass2014sexually].
\end_layout

\begin_layout Standard
Biological states are characterized by distinct patterns of gene expression
 that reflect each phenotype's active cellular processes.
 Driving these phenotypes are gene regulatory networks in which transcriptions
 factors control when and to what degree individual genes are expressed.
 Phenotypic transitions, such as those that occur when disease arises from
 healthy tissue, are associated with changes in these networks.
 MONSTER is a new approach to understanding these transitions.
 MONSTER models phenotypic-specific regulatory networks and then estimates
 a ``transition matrix'' that converts one state to another.
 By examining the properties of the transition matrix, we can gain insight
 into regulatory changes associated with phenotypic state transition.
 We demonstrate the power of MONSTER by applying it to data from four independen
t studies of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease and find a robust set
 of transcription factors that help explain the development of the disease.
 
\end_layout

\end_body
\end_document
